# Previous Reporting
Media coverage of the issue of abortion access in immigration detention first began in 2017, when the American Civil Liberties Union sued the Trump administration to force them to allow unaccompanied immigrant minors in the custody of the Office of Refugee Resettlement to access abortion. The media reported on events in the court case ([here](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/25/us/undocumented-immigrant-abortion.html) is an example of such an article), and some articles also went deeper into the issue, looking into exactly what was being done to pregnant minors in ORR custody (like [this one](https://www.motherjones.com/politics/2017/11/internal-emails-reveal-how-the-trump-administration-blocks-abortions-for-migrant-teens/), which looks at internal ORR emails obtained by the ACLU as part of the lawsuit).

After the ACLU reached a settlement with the government where detained minors would be allowed to access abortion, coverage of the issue largely dropped off, but it picked back up again when Roe v. Wade was overturned, as immigrants held in detention centers aren’t free to travel to other states to access abortion the way other people in states that have banned abortion are. This Buzzfeed [article](https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/adolfoflores/immigrant-minor-us-custody-abortion-restrictions), for instance, discusses how the fall of Roe v. Wade impacts abortion access for immigrant minors held by ORR. There are also articles like [this one](https://www.axios.com/2022/07/12/abortion-access-detained-migrants-ice) that report on an Immigration and Customs Enforcement memo saying that detained immigrants seeking abortions will be moved to states where abortion is still legal.

What is missing in the reporting on this issue is a data journalism piece that analyzes the number of detained immigrants that will be affected by Roe v. Wade being overturned. We want to create a piece that analyzes how many immigrants are held in states that have banned or greatly restricted abortion compared to states where the procedure remains largely legal.

Data on the number of immigrants held by ICE in each state can be obtained from Syracuse University’s [Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse](https://trac.syr.edu/immigration/detentionstats/facilities.html), and data on the number of ORR shelters in each state as of 2020 can be found in a Government Accountability Office [report](https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-20-609). The New York Times maintains a regularly updated [database](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2022/us/abortion-laws-roe-v-wade.html) of abortion laws in each state.

We trust the data from Syracuse University’s Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse (TRAC) because it is a comprehensive, independent and nonpartisan institute. Many prestigious media outlets quote TRAC’s data and analysis. Over the past two years, TRAC at Syracuse University has been collecting, vetting, and analyzing ICE’s bi-weekly public detention data releases. When TRAC found errors with ICE's latest release of detention data, it straightforwardly pointed them out and urged ICE to improve its transparency and quality assurance practices and urged Congress and the public to hold the agency accountable to its lawful transparency obligations. However, given the problems TRAC has mentioned with ICE data, it is worth reaching out to them to ask how exactly they got the data in their dataset in order to make sure it is reliable. Another potential problem with the data is that different facilities have data from different times. Some of the data are from 2022, while other facilities have data listed from as far back as 2019. We will need to reach out to TRAC and discuss with them the reliability of the data given these discrepancies.

The Government Accountability Office’s report is regarded as reliable because the GAO has been a source of objective, non-partisan information on government operations for over a century, and therefore it is a trustworthy source of primary information. The limitation of the data from the GAO report is that it uses data from 2020, so it is not completely up to date. The data are also too coarse. It does not show the number of minors held by ORR in each state but only the number of ORR-funded shelters in each state, which just partly meets our needs. If we can not get data on the number of minors held in each state from ORR, we will have to make do with this and make assumptions about the relative number of minors held in each state based on the number of shelters in each state.

The New York Times is a world-renowned, reputable news media outlet with a strict fact-check system. Their state-by-state abortion law map is frequently updated which provides dependable information about the abortion laws in different states. One limitation is that state abortion laws are frequently changing, so even though the New York Times is continuously updating the data, we will still need to independently check it. This shouldn’t be too hard, as state laws are publicly available. However, the New York Times does not provide direct links to the laws, so we will need to manually look up up each state’s abortion laws. The New York Times’s data provides a good starting point, however.
